# SynthDefs

A [``````SynthDef``````](https://doc.sccode.org/Classes/SynthDef.html) provides a convenient interface to create sound synthesis modules in SuperCollider. It also offers a set of interaction capabilities to alter the musical parameters of the sound synthesis on a higher level. To create it we type ```SynthDef```, it has to have a unique name, once is created we need to load it on the Server using the message ```.add```. Now is a good time to boot the Server, in order to upload any ```SynthDefs```. An important information on this, is that, this is a way to describe to the Server how to create the connections of the Unit Generators. A node will be created based on this, which will be an instance of the ```SynthDef``` itself using a [```Synth```](https://doc.sccode.org/Classes/Synth.html) class as it is illustrated below.

```js
(
SynthDef(\mySynth, 
	{|out = 0, amp = 0.6| 
	var sig; 
	sig = SinOsc.ar([120.0, 121.0]); // a two output sine oscillator synth. 
	sig = sig / 2; 
	Out.ar(out, sig \* amp); 
}).add; 
)

Synth(\mySynth);
```

Our SynthDef is a (two output) sine oscillator synthesizer with fixed values (leftChannel:120.0, rightChannel:121.0), and it takes advantage of *multichannel expansion* in SC which is implemented using an array. This is one of the strenghts of SC as multiple ugens can be used to create complex sound engines. To hear the ```SynthDef``` we need to use another class names Synth, which is used to create an instance of the ```SynthDef``` which is loaded on the Server. You can also pass default values to a ```SynthDef``` like 'amp'. Sometimes we need to do more manipulation on the signal i.e., add a filter in the signal chain but is better to keep ```SynthDef```s simple and create other ones for extra manipulation.

## Output Signal & Busses
By convention out will be via the left channel of your audio, ```[0]``` that is unless you want to use some other busses to dtive your signal through it. 
[Busses](https://doc.sccode.org/Classes/Bus.html) can be hard coded or assigned automatically, for example by default [0] is a buss that is allocated by SC. You may give define your own busses but this is uneccessary and cumbersome. Remember last week's discussion about the ```Server```. To understand how busses are working you may compare with analog mixer. Each input of the mixer can be assigned to a specific output and add some effects alike.

```js
~fx = Bus.audio(0, 1); // name of the bus is assigned as global variable inside your code.
```

## Useful to know
Server architecture and Nodes discussion from help files.

## Envelopes and SynthDef

To apply [ADSR](https://g.co/kgs/F6rgYZ) properties to a ```SynthDef``` we use an Env specification. To be able to retrigger the envelope we use an ```EnvGen```. Run this line below and see how the envelope of the synthesizer will look like.

```js
Env.new([0, 1, 0.9, 0], [0.1, 0.5, 1],[-5, 0, -5]).plot;
```

Envelope on our previous ```SynthDef```.

```js
(
SynthDef(\myEnvSynth, {|out = 0, amp = 0.3| 
	var sig, env; 
	env = Env.new([0, 1, 0.9, 0], [0.1, 0.5, 1],[-5, 0, -5]); 
	sig = SinOsc.ar([120.0, 121.0]); 
	sig = sig * EnvGen.kr(env, doneAction: 2); 
	Out.ar(out, sig * amp); 
}).add; 
)

Synth(\myEnvSynth);
```

Assuming the previous ```SynthDef``` is loaded we can assign the ```Synth``` class to a variable like this below:
```js
x = Synth(\myEnvSynth); // x now is our Synth and can be used anywhere in our program as it is a global variable. 
x.set(\amp;, 0.1); // the set message requires the name of the parameter and a value.
```

## More complex example
By using something called ```.do``` we can instantiate multiple nodes. 
```js
8.do{
  Synth(\nsynth, [\freq, 220.0.rand, \amp, 0.25]) 
  /* mark the amplitude control, in cases of triggering many synths this will naturally cause the clipping of the signal. You need to take extra care of this..*/ 
};
```

## Groups of Synths
To interact at once with many synths or nodes these must be grouped using ```Group.new()``` class. Mind that once you kill all synths in server this will also suspend any groups created in it. So you will have to run the group again. Groups are very useful when _order of execution_ is crucial. Covered in later tutorials, as a way to maintain a neat way to organising your programs.
```js
~groupSineSynth = Group.new();

~mySynth = Synth(\mySynth, [
	\freq, exprand(120.0, 220.0),
	\amp, rrand(0.1, 0.99),
	\release, rrand(0.1, 2.0)
], ~groupSineSynth);

~groupSineSynth.free;

~groupSineSynth.set(\freq, rrand(120.0, 220.0));

~groupSineSynth.set(\amp, 0.2);
```

## Instantiating and Controlling Nodes with Functional Programming
As we know alreade functions can provide some mechanism for specific tasks, similarly, in sound making this can create some tasks including geenration of data and passing input from outside the functions so it can manage useful musical interactions. Example below show this in a plain way. More complicated ways can be assigned at your will.
```js
~myFunction = {
	arg index = 0;
	var arrayVal = [120.0, 220.0, 440.0, 660.0, 880.0];
	~mySynth.set(\freq, arrayVal[index]); //Assuming a synth named this way is alreay running.
};

~myFunction.value(2);
```

## Discussion: anatomy of a ```SynthDef```

A ```SynthDef``` is the sound engine of our program or instrument we are building. It provides a set of interaction messages, such as .set .free and is a good idea to be started through another class named Synth and using the name of the ```SynthDef```. Make sure to load ```SynthDef```s using a method called ```.add;``` Each ```SynthDef``` can contain different oscillators and/or implement different synthesis techniques (e.g. granular).

## Assignment: 3
Create several ```SynthDefs``` which you can pass some control values using methods discussed this week. By the end of this assignment you will be able to create some textural progression which can be controlled. Remember, you can limit your sounds by applying envelope capabilities in your ```SynthDefs``` by multiplying the amplitude or the signal itself with ```Env``` wrapped in ```EnvGen``` to trigger this.
